---
title: "My conversation with Secretary Adrian Fontes"
date: "2026-01-18"
category: "Interviews"
author: "Marc Elias"
url: "https://member.democracydocket.com/my-conversation-with-secretary-adrian-fontemy-conversation-with-secretary-adrian-fontes-"
images: []
---

My conversation with Secretary Adrian Fontes30:38*Arizona Secretary of State Adrian Fontes isn’t new to the fight for democracy. Before becoming the chief election official in Arizona, he was overseeing elections as the Maricopa County Recorder. Fontes is one of our strongest soldiers for democracy, and he isn’t messing around when it comes to protecting free and fair elections. As he said, “it’s going to be a knock-down, drag-out fight.” And he certainly isn’t afraid of a fight.*

*This interview has been edited for length and clarity.*

**Marc Elias: Adrian Fontes, welcome back to Defending Democracy.**

Adrian Fontes: Happy to be here with you, Marc.

**Marc Elias: We are a year into the Trump presidency. We just recently experienced the one year anniversary of Jan. 6th. I want to get your take on the arc of time, whether it's the five years from Jan. 6th, whether it's the one year that Donald Trump has been in office, because what people may or may not know is you were in 2020 literally at ground zero for election denialism, for the circus that became the big lie.**

**The nature of the allegations in Arizona were always more preposterous, but it lingered in the culture much longer and some would argue is still lingering there today. So maybe you could start in 2020 and then move from then about what your reflections are.**

Adrian Fontes: Well, let me preface this by saying as much as I love Arizona — I'm a native, my family's been here for literally centuries — when it comes to politics, we put the AZ in crazy, especially since 2020. Now, as you said, I was the Maricopa County Recorder. The chief election officer for what became the second largest voting jurisdiction in the United States, the greater Phoenix area and all of those cities and towns. Almost two and a half million voters were in my charge for that 2020 election.

And don't forget, I was on the ballot for reelection as the Maricopa County Recorder, as was then-President Trump for reelection. Both of us lost. I didn't complain because I knew the system was solid and the folks operated with integrity. But right after election night, we started seeing those crowds gathering outside that warehouse, the QAnon Shaman, Jacob Chansley, Alex Jones, Congressman Gosar, chanting and screaming and yelling with absolutely no reason to do so. It was a security circumstance.

And eventually what ended up happening in Arizona, the state Senate ended up creating this Cyber Ninja audit weirdness and ballots were turned over to some absolute incompetence. Even former Secretary of State Ken Bennett, a Republican who was there to kind of watch things happen, said that it was just nonsensical. That was allowed by former president of the state Senate here, Karen Fann, which embarrassed the hell out of Arizona. Through all of that nonsense that was fueled by the conspiracy theories, the grift was created and the grift continued in the next several years.

Election denialism turned into Kari Lake running for governor and then Kari Lake running for Senate and all of these other folks running for offices, some of whom are now serving not just in Arizona but across the country.

We've got some of the bad guys inside of the castle now in election administration offices across the United States of America. And we're fighting a different kind of battle. Back then it was from the outside. Back then it was people who had been pushed out and they were banging on the door.

Now we've got them inside of the system and we've got to find the best ways to work through all of that to move forward so that we can continue with this democracy that we love and some of us signed up to volunteer to serve for. I spent four years in the Marine Corps and I never thought I'd see a time when members of our own government at the federal, state, and even local level now were working against our democracy.

So these last several years have been a hell of an adventure in American politics and I look back to just after that election day on Jan. 6th with kind of disdain, embarrassment. It was, I think, the worst political stain against this country that we have seen with the degradation of our capital, the violence, the unnecessary deaths, particularly of those folks who were trying to keep the capital safe. This is not a happy day. It's a day like I've said that'll live in infamy just like that other infamous day that we saw back in 1941.

**Marc Elias: My recollections of Arizona in 2020 was that it was a very well run election and not actually in the end all that close. And the first time I realized that the allegations being made in Arizona were just completely frivolous was a series of lawsuits that got dubbed "Sharpiegate." And this was a false claim that somehow Sharpies had marked ballots and had bled through. There was literally nothing to it. That isn't how the ballots work. But yet there wound up being this successive series of lawsuits on this.**

Adrian Fontes: It's funny because Sharpiegate is one of the coolest weird stories of my personal experience. I ran the 2018 election and the 2020 election. But the tabulators where the ballots went through were different systems from the same company. In the 2018 system, it was an optical scan. So all of the selections on the ballot front and back lined up because the optical scan thing was mechanical, it was like a Scantron. So they had to line up to the scanner. And if you used Sharpies in 2018, they could bleed through and that sometimes caused issues and we'd have to hand check those ballots. That was 2018.

In the 2020 system, we told people, "Please use Sharpies” because that new system, the tabulators, in front of the scanning lens had a plastic feeder that protected the lens. And if the ink didn't dry fast enough, that thing would get ink residue on it. We tested and tested and tested this. Well, Sharpiegate was based on this notion that there were old instructions out there that said "don't use Sharpies." And in 2020 we started saying "we do use Sharpies." And that became Sharpiegate because now we've got all these instructions and people weren't discerning 2018 instructions from 2020 instructions. The fact that the new stuff is a lot better, a lot faster, but needed a different kind of physical interaction between the voter and the ballot was the impetus for the whole thing. And we did not get the resources necessary to communicate to folks what the change was. The face that some people don't like funding the government or educating people means that this sort of thing could arise.

Like you've mentioned, it turned into a giant lawsuit and it turned into a giant scandal literally about nothing. And even some of those folks who filed these cases and filed these statements were sanctioned by the Supreme Court and disciplined by the state bar of Arizona. In fact, the guy I'm running against in November of 2026 is one of those "Kraken" lawyers of the Sidney Powell team.

**Marc Elias: Wow, I didn't know that!**

Adrian Fontes: Yeah, he's endorsed by Turning Point. But he has been sanctioned by the Supreme Court, disciplined by the state bar for lying in these pleadings that you probably fought directly against. We're still facing these challenges, but now these folks are in government. He is now in the State House of Representatives and he's going to be running against me for Secretary of State in my reelection this November. So we're still fighting these same fights against these same people. And it is their capacity to hornswoggle and gaslight folks that keeps them in the grift. And that's really unfortunate and sad that they have so little honor and such a lack of integrity. It just kind of bums me out.

**Marc Elias: You mentioned something which was actually one of the reasons why I wanted to have you on, which is about funding of elections. You said that you can basically have two of three things. Right?**

Adrian Fontes: You can do two or three. You can do accurate elections, fast election results, or cheap elections. You cannot have all three. If you want speed and you want accuracy, you've got to pay for it. It costs a lot of money. Now one of the other things I think that's important here is this notion of faster results. And there's a lot of people getting gaslit on this thing.

Network predictions are the only results you see on election night. There is no jurisdiction in the United States of America that gives you actual results on election night. That is a lie. What you see on election night is a prediction from the networks. They do their math. They've got their statisticians and all that stuff. Whether they're dependable or not is up to you all. It doesn't matter. The point is results take time and they take a lot of money.

Accurate results take more money. So: fast, accurate, or cheap? You can't have all three. You've got to pick two. We think, and we have always thought in Arizona, we need accuracy. That's always been number one, and that's what we've worked on. And the fact that Arizona likes doing things, my predecessor in the Recorder's office would say, "as cheap as humanly possible," means that we didn't have fast results. That's why Maricopa County always took a little time, but we always got it really, really right. We always got it really, really accurate, and we still do. So this is one thing I think people need to realize.

Election administration is its own monster. It's hugely complicated, but we make it seem very simple. I'll give you a great example. Just about everybody's got one of these [smartphones]. But most folks don’t actually know how to put it together. You and me can swipe, talk to somebody on the other side of the planet. We don't know how it all works. That's how election administration is, particularly in big jurisdictions. It's complicated. But we make it easy for the voters on purpose because we want Americans to have access. We want as many American voices involved in that little-d democratic decision-making process so that we can get the true voice of our democracy out there, the true power of the people reflected in the results.

That's what those of us who are fighting for every voter, regardless of party, regardless of affiliation... we want as much participation as possible so we try to make it as easy as possible while maintaining accuracy, security and integrity in these systems.

**Marc Elias: Before I was known as a general voting rights litigator, I was probably best known as a post-election litigator. I had done a series of recounts and election contests going all the way back to Mary Landrieu's 1996 Senate race. In 1998, I worked for Harry Reid in a very close election contest. In 2000, I was in Washington State for Maria Cantwell. Al Franken in 2008.**

**It’s interesting because in all of those instances, we prized accuracy. We didn't necessarily focus on speed. The fact is I didn't get to Minnesota, for example, for the Franken recount for four or five days after election night. I was just waiting for the full results to come in. And that's the same with Florida in 2018 when I went there for Bill Nelson after he narrowly lost his Senate race by a tenth of a percent.**

**Historically, there was never a reason to worry about this the day, the night of, or the next morning or even the morning after that. Because as you say, it took a while for the votes to be counted. But something happened in 2020 where the Republicans weaponized that process. And rather than treating that as getting it right, they treated it with suspicion. You would think that if they were really worried about fraud, you'd worry if the results came in too quickly, right? You'd say, "Well, how could that possibly be that all of these precincts and all of these provisional ballots and all of these mail-in ballots... how could it all be resolved on election night?" But they wound up flipping that on its head, Secretary.**

Adrian Fontes: 2018 was really interesting because I remember it vividly. It was Kyrsten Sinema and Martha McSally and the lead flip-flopped about every day for a week, right? And we got it right at the end of the day. And it was Maricopa County that everybody was looking at. That was my first big general election as an election administrator. And I look back at that and I think we got it right. That's what mattered. It wasn't about speed.

But here's the thing, when you want to destroy a system, you find every possible way to attack that system. The notion of attacking American elections because they're not fast enough is a red herring. It's not a real issue, but it's been turned into a real issue. It's turned into a real concern by misnaming network predictions as election results. They've been very successful at that. By saying that, as you've indicated, slower results means less dependability, which is exactly the opposite of what's true.

And so what they've done is they've weaponized the notion of accuracy by turning this little red herring thing into a problem and then turning it up on its head to say "this is why this is a bad thing." When you don't want to have something happen, you point out all of the reasons why it's bad.

They don't want elections to happen in this country. They're tired of democracy. They're tired of the fact that you as a voter get to decide who is in power, because every once in a while, you'll pick somebody other than them. They're tired of the fact that Americans get a choice and that Americans all get a chance to actually speak up.

That is the biggest problem that we've got and that we're fighting against. We want to hear every American voice even if they disagree with us. They don't want to hear any American voices except one. And that is anti-American. That's not un-American. It's anti-American. And the notion of weaponizing fast results as a problem in elections is another one of the pieces of their puzzle that they're trying to put together to discontinue the practice of free and fair elections here in the United States.

**Marc Elias: One of the tactics that Trump used in 2020 elsewhere was to try to prevent the certification of accurate results. And then in 2022, we saw in Cochise County, Arizona, an effort by the local election board to literally try to reject the results of a free and fair election and try to refuse to certify the results. If you want to talk about something that should be setting off alarm bells for anyone who cares about democracy, it's that, right? Tell us about that and what steps you've taken, what steps have been taken to try to prevent that in the future.**

Adrian Fontes: What ended up happening down there was the Board of Supervisors, which is like a county board of commissioners in many other states. Our Board of Supervisors acts as the county election board and they do what's called a canvas. That's the formal certification after tabulation is done. And then they push all of the results for state races and federal races up to the Secretary of State's office for that final statewide canvas. Cochise County said, "We're not going to do that."

And it ended up becoming something that was litigated. You were part of that litigation, as I recall. And one of those members of that board of supervisors is set for a criminal trial for interfering with those government processes. It hasn't happened yet, but they are still working on that. They were sued. They were holding the election director under scrutiny and she stood up to them. I happen to have her as the state election director now because she has integrity and she is a Republican. A Republican who believes in the rule of law and free and fair elections. And I'm a Democrat. I like people who stand up for what's right and for voters.

So once that fight started happening there, we set forth a series of rule proposals in our elections procedures manual. We just published the 2025 version certified by the governor and the attorney general as law requires. And basically what we're saying is: Look, we're going to go forward no matter what. You can have your weirdness down at the county level, but we're going to figure out the right way to make this happen so that the voters' voices are heard regardless of who the voters vote for. Now, understand the politics here. Cochise County, Arizona is a very red county.

But that doesn't mean that their votes don't count or that their votes shouldn't count. They are Americans, they are Arizonans, they are voting legitimately, and we're going to hold the system to account so that those voices get heard. That's the critical component here.

The problem that you're talking about here and that we're addressing is that there are now a lot of folks across the country who've been elected into these types of positions who are going to be looking at something like that, I fear, for the November 2026 cycle. We are expecting that things aren't going to go the way of the president's party, I assume. And I think I'm looking at places all across the United States of America where this could be problematic. So you're saying it's a five alarm fire. I agree.

We need to pay very close attention to who's making the rules, who's going to be doing all of those certifications right now. In fact, we should have been paying attention for the last year and a half to make sure that we've got the right people in place, but not just that, the right processes and procedures so that we can push legit results — which is what we always get in this country — through the system to get to our certifications so that those voices can be heard. Again, regardless of who they vote for. The American people are the ones with the power. That power should be reflected in those legitimate results that we've always seen.

Let me wax poetic for one second here. If the Constitution could be boiled down into two words, in my view, it would be this: due process. Due process for the criminally accused, due process for litigants, due process for voters. Due process is the rule of law manifest. And this is so critically important for us to remember. No person regardless of their station or place should be above the law. And every voter's voice should also be heard and counted based on those rules that are previously set. So I'm passionate about this and I'm glad you're bringing this particular point to our attention. Folks should be paying attention to what's happening at the most local level of election administration. That's where the sausage gets made.

**Marc Elias: This is why I was thrilled when you ran for Secretary of State. It's why I endorsed you and I'm thrilled you won for Secretary of State. Because you have the experience of running elections on the ground. And that's not to criticize secretaries of state or governors who have not. But you know the real friction points that voters face. And one of the accomplishments that I want to talk to you about that I just think you deserve an enormous amount of credit for is Arizona has an election procedure manual.**

**Every state should have this requirement. It's a model for the country. And it is the nuts and bolts of how elections are conducted. And so you're a nuts and bolts guy. This manual before you took office had been sort of waylaid. You inherited an old manual but you updated it, you got it through, you improved it, you clarified it. So talk about that as a priority of yours and how that has improved the voting process and experience for people.**

Adrian Fontes: The elections procedures manual in Arizona is basically the rule book for local election administrators and for the secretary, anybody involved in the process. In that manual, what we do is we take the statutes, we take the case law, and we lay it out in best practice form. It standardizes all of the practices of election administration for the whole state. Now remember, Arizona has very diverse jurisdictions. So Maricopa County, for example, is the second largest voting jurisdiction in the country with about two and a half million voters. Greenlee County, Arizona has like 6,000 voters. So we've got to make something that's workable for the great diaspora of population, geography, language.

We've got huge populations here that speak the Navajo language, the Diné language. We've got languages like Apache, which are not written languages. They're just oral. So we've got to have processes and procedures for dealing with all of the different stuff that Arizona has to make sure that it's standardized. This manual by statute is required to be published or I should say promulgated by the secretary once every two years. And that is to update the statutes. And if there's been litigation, the rulings from the court can get updated in there. And just to kind of make everything easily workable for the local election administrators who are not usually lawyers.

Well, for many, many secretaries past, the much maligned process, the much fought over process has not resulted in a manual being published. And so when I took office, I made it my number one priority. I got an election director to help me out with that the first time around who was probably the best election lawyer in the state of Arizona. And she was just amazing. Helped put this thing together, brought everybody in, and we put it out in 205. We did the same process. We went through, we got all the counties involved and promulgated it again. Again, approved by the governor and the attorney general. This is the first time that Arizona has had this manual published two issues in a row as required in a long, long time. So I'm very proud of that achievement.

But the great thing about it for voters is you get a standard experience in the entire state. Regardless of the resource allocation, regardless of the language, the geography, the spaces, you get a standard experience in the state. And it's so much easier when we go to do the things like you do, to litigate at the end. Candidates know what to expect, political parties know what to expect, everybody knows what to expect, and that's really what we want as far as a voting experience is concerned. Now, truth be told, the manual isn't made for voters. It's made for election administrators. It's not generated for public consumption, but we make it easy to understand language. So if somebody comes in and wants to be a marshal at a polling place or they want to be an election judge or one of these sorts of jobs, they can go to that manual and they can read what it says in plain language what their job is supposed to be based on the law.

We're super proud of that. And I really appreciate you bringing it up because it's something that's really important and really necessary. That way we don't have individual county officials just interpreting statute their own way. And you might have one county attorney over here saying something and another county attorney over there saying something different. It takes away all of the uncertainty and it puts Arizonans on the same narrow path insofar as their election administration is concerned. So it's fair. And again, that's part of that due process that I've been talking about that's so critically important. We have to run a society that has predictable rules when you've got fair contests.

That's how it works for America. You can't have this willy-nilly sort of just like off the cuff or shooting from the hip type of processes. You've got to have the rules laid out and I'm super proud of the team that I've got now that has helped put this together for a couple of cycles. We've done it and I'm super glad that we have because it lays out the rules for '26 in a way that really benefits voters from their election administrators' perspective.

**Marc Elias: I want to ask you about something that is of great concern to me. I've described this as what will be the biggest story of the 2026 election cycle: the effort by the Department of Justice to access voter files in all 50 states, plus the District of Columbia. These are sensitive records. Typically the Department of Justice would have no need for this because, you know, in Arizona you run elections along with the counties, right?**

**The federal government doesn't have an administrator of national elections. So the fact that Pam Bondi and Harmeet Dhillon, the head of the Civil Rights Division, they want this data from all 50 states. How should people think about this? How worried should people be? And what is Arizona's stance on this?**

Adrian Fontes: Well, I'll tell you right now, and I'll say it publicly, they're going to have to put me in jail if they want this information and have somebody else give it to them because I'm not going to do it. First and foremost, the information that they're asking for isn't all public. Some of it is. As you mentioned, the voter rolls pretty much are all public record. You've got to have some accountability. Who lives in what houses, how many ballots go to those houses in the mail? Your political party affiliation in Arizona, that's on our voter rolls. Nothing secret about that and you shouldn't be ashamed of it. It is what it is.

So there is some of that information that's already publicly available. But the last four of your Social Security number, your date of birth, things of this nature that are what we consider personally identifying information is not available to the public. And we like to maintain security on that stuff because we don't want identity theft or identity fraud to be happening. And so to that end, the state of Arizona has statutes that forbid the release of this information. I like to follow state law, but not only that, the Privacy Act of 1974 that was passed after concerns emerging from Watergate scandals were people's personal identifying information was being used by the federal government. It's against the Privacy Act for me to send that information to anyone.

Then you have this whole dimension of why is it that the Department of Justice says that it wants this information. That's a whole second set of considerations. So the first consideration is this: It would be illegal of me to release the information to the Department of Justice as they have requested it. Period. They're asking me to break the law and I won't do it.

Secondly, their motive for doing it is bonkers. Here's the deal about voter lists. They're not static. And in a state like Arizona where you've got nearly five million voters, 4.7 million folks on those voter rolls, it's dynamic. How many tens of thousands of people go through online motor division, our motor vehicle division websites, which is where a lot of our voter registration stuff happens?

We're talking about literally tens of thousands of transactions a day. So taking a snapshot isn't going to give you anything. Moreover, what they're saying is, "We want to do this with it." And then they said, "No, do we want to do *that* with it?" And their shifting justification tells me, A, they're either lying, one or several of the different justifications is a lie because it's misrepresenting what they actually want to do with it. B, what they say they want to do with it — and this is the main justification — "we want to check for voter fraud or any of that sort of stuff." A snapshot of the voter rolls is not going to do that for you. So the way they want to use the data is wrong.

And then you look to what is the actual role of the Department of Justice in the Civil Rights Division insofar as voter rolls are concerned. Their role is to make sure that federal law is followed. That means "Hey Arizona, what does your process look like?" Not "What do your voter rolls look like? What's the data in your rolls?" That's not what they should be analyzing. That's not what the law gives them. The law gives them authority over: Are you following the processes required by law? That's different from individual data. So what they're doing is invading into space where they don't belong. It would be illegal of me to comply with their requests. I'm not going to make myself a criminal because the Department of Justice wants to go do some other bonkers thing.

Moreover, I don't trust them. I don't trust them. We know that the Social Security Administration data ended up on some unsecured server to the tune of like 300 million people's data. Just nobody knows for sure if it was secured or not. I don't trust them. Marc, if you were an Arizona voter, I'd say I'm protecting your data. I'm protecting my data, my family's data, my friends and Republicans' data as well, and everybody's data. Look, we live in a data world and we all know the dangers of having that stuff out there and the possible negative circumstances against it. Why in the world would I just turn that over to a bunch of amateurs and a bunch of folks whose motives I can't discern?

I can't trust. I am absolutely refusing. If we haven't been sued already, we're going to get sued. I think we're already part of that litigation that multiple states have been sued by the Department of Justice. And it's going to take a lot more than just a court order to get me to turn this stuff over. It's going to be a knock-down, drag-out fight. I will not turn this data over as long as I am the Secretary of State here in Arizona. It's just not going to happen. And I have warned our local election officials as well in writing: it is against the law for you to turn this data over to the federal government as well. So we're doing everything we can to protect our voters, their information, and the integrity of our election systems from this invasive and unjustified Department of Justice request.

[Watch the full interview here >>>](https://youtu.be/b0rCb--xaNA?si=z_Z57YuROydzS6qS)
